Numerical Haskell: a NumHask roadmap

What is NumHask?
NumHask is an alternative set of numerical classes, developed over the last
decade by Tony Day.
The standard system of numerical classes in base Haskell was defined to package
the functionality of the provided numerical types. In particular, it was not
defined with a view to the functionality other numerical types that others might
have a need for.
Indeed, it is easy to think of systems of numbers that are poorly represented
even by the most basic Haskell number class, Num:
• Vectors (in two dimensions, let’s say for definiteness) have well-defined
addition and subtraction, and one might want to write those as + and -.
But there is no multiplication, and certainly no division. So one has to
define a dishonest Num instance where multiplication is undefined. This is
of course forces us to forgo the safety of the type system: if one multiplies
vectors, one discovers this only when the program crashes at runtime,
rather than at compile time as one should.
• The Complex type makes perfect sense for any base ring: for example
Complex
Int is the Gaussian integers. However, we don’t have a Num
instance for Complex Int: we only have
RealFloat a => Num (Complex a)
This is because Num instances require an absolute value abs and a sign
signum, which for complex numbers z are interpreted to mean the magnitude |z| and the normalisation z/|z|, which require square roots, and Int
doesn’t have them.
If you want arithmetic operations on the Gaussian integers, the situation
here is even worse: you need to create a newtype for Complex and then
put a Num instance on that, again providing bottom-valued instances for
the inappropriate methods abs and signum, and live with the fact that you
have two different versions knocking around.
NumHask provides a more gradual approach: there are classes corresponding to
smaller chunks of functionality, so you can express what functionality a number
1

type has in a much more nuanced way.
For example, the four basic arithmetic operations are provided by classes
Additive, Subtractive, Multiplicative and Divisive, so that vectors can
have instances of the first two but not the last two, and so we can have
Additive a => Additive (Complex a)
and so on.

What might NumHask be?
I want to discuss a broad collection of things that I think NumHask could do
better. In some cases I’ve got a fairly strong idea how to do it, in some cases
maybe just some steps in the right direction, and in some cases not even that.
Some of them interact, and I’ve tried to highlight that where it’s interesting to
do so.
1. Explicit property classes
At present, NumHask confuses structure and properties fairly systematically.
We have
type Distributive a = (Additive a, Multiplicative a)
type Ring a = (Distributive a, Subtractive a)
type SemiField a = (Distributive a, Divisive a)
type Field a = (Ring a, Divisive a)
I find this a little uncomfortable. Anybody can define a type and put Additive
and Multiplicative instances on it, and nobody has warned them not to do
this if the two instances don’t satisfy a distributive law, and so NumHask will
give the appearance of certifying that a distributive law holds whether or not it
actually does, insofar as that type can automatically be used for functions with
Distributive in the context.
Perhaps we can trust people not to put both such instances on a type if they do
not play nicely with each other. However, for a real-life problem present right
now in the library, we have an instance of Ring for Natural… but the natural
numbers do not form a ring!
I suppose the mildest solution would be simply to add grave warnings to the documentation. But it’s probably better to use classes as a certification of behaviour,
so that we have
class (Additive a, Multiplicative a) => Distributive a
and so on. If you implement these you’re guaranteeing that the relevant behaviour actually holds: for example, defining a Distributive instance is a
guarantee that there is a distributive law. This does of course increase the work

2

of providing functionality on numeric types, but on the whole it’s a good thing
to think about whether various laws hold, and to document one’s conclusions.
Actually, Semiring is probably a better name than Distributive, since it follows
the pattern of the other names better.
Sometimes the current approach is appropriate, as some properties are just
useful combinations of others. For example, it would cause no problems to
define
type Ring a = (Semiring a, AdditiveGroup a)
because a ring is the same thing as a semiring with a total subtraction operation.
1.1. The role of FromInteger We should embed FromInteger in the hierarchy
more aggressively. Any ring can have a FromInteger instance defined on it (as
a category theorist would say, “ℤ is initial in the category of rings”), so making
FromInteger part of Ring as well seems like a good idea. It’s more work for the
implementor but makes life easier for the user.
It would similarly make sense to make any type classes designed to represent
the real numbers (like ExpField and TrigField) depend on FromRational;
currently coding with these classes requires quite a lot of circumlocation (one /
(one + one) appears in the codebase, for example).
2. Partial subtraction and division: an honest approach
There’s currently a philosophical inconsistency between what Subtraction and
Division represent. I think a bit of thought can result in more features, more
implementation, and more clarity.
What’s the problem? Well, here’s the discrepancy:
• It is normal practice to provide Subtractive instances, even when subtraction is a partial operation. Natural has a Subtractive instance just like
how Int does, even though the former is partial while the latter is total.
• Pretty much all Divisive instances are partial, in that division by zero is
pretty much never defined. However, in practice instances are only defined
if they’re total except for division by zero.
This is not really a problem that originated with NumHask: it’s just the long
shadow of base Haskell’s Num class, which demands (+), (-) and (*) to do
anything at all, but has (/) sitting further up the class hierarchy.
What should be done about it? Here’s three ideas.
2.1. Consistently providing instances We should provide Divisive instances
whenever we have a natural concept of division which is
• at least sometimes defined;

3

• checked, in the sense that undefined divisions return an error; and
• lawful, in that the following laws hold:
– x / 1 is always defined and equal to x,
– if x * (y / z) is defined then so is (x * y) / z, and if so they are
equal, and
– x / (y * z) is defined if and only if (x / y) / z is, and if so they
are equal.
In particular, Int should have be Divisive, and this functionality is useful (if
you have a number n which you believe should be even, then n / 2 will halve it
if possible and throw an error if not).
The policy for defining Subtractive instances should be precisely analogous,
but by and large this is just codifying what’s already there! Meanwhile Additive
and Multiplicative will be assumed to represent total operations.
The arithmetic exceptions in base Haskell are not perfectly geared up for this;
Underflow is a good error to return when subtraction fails, but not all division
failures are DivideByZero. They could be replaced, or we could live with it.
It’s also worth pointing out that we make a practical and philosophical distinction between operations which are partial because of limitations in the way they
model mathematical numbers, and operations which are partial for inherent
mathematical reasons. For example, Int has a machine-specific bound: currently
(−263 , 263 − 1) on many systems (including mine). This means I can’t correctly
evaluate 5000000000000000000 + 5000000000000000000 :: Int, but we nevertheless regard Int as having a total addition operation: it’s intended to model
the integers, and intended to be used only in situations where its limitations as
a model of the integers can safely be overlooked.
2.2. Property classes In keeping with section 1 above, a number of classes
should be added which certify good properties of subtraction and division. The
obvious examples are:
• AdditiveGroup, to indicate that subtraction is total (which will be the case
for many inbuilt numeric types);
• MultiplicativeGroup, to indicate that division is total (which will not be
the case for many inbuilt numeric types, because of division by zero);
• Field, to indicate a (commutative) ring which is total except for division
by zero. Section 5 below, on commutativity, will be relevant here.
2.3. Introspective arithmetic classes There is additional functionality which
can often be provided, and which eases the difficulty of working with partial
operations. This functionality is embodied in the following two classes:
class Subtractive a => WhenSubtractive a where
-- | Subtract or report failure

4

(-?) :: a -> a -> Maybe a
-- | Is "x - y" defined?
subtractable :: a -> a -> Bool
-- | Negate or report failure
tryNegate :: a -> Maybe a
-- | Is "negate x" defined?
negatable :: a -> Bool
class Divisive a => WhenDivisive a where
-- | Divide or report failure
(/?) :: a -> a -> Maybe a
-- | Is "x / y" defined?
dividable :: a -> a -> Bool
-- | Invert or report failure
tryRecip :: a -> Maybe a
-- | Is "recip x" defined?
invertible :: a -> Bool
These classes can be defined for almost all current instances of Subtractive and
Divisive, and could usually be defined uniformly from a small number of basic
instances using deriving via.
The exceptions are some extremely large types. We have
Subtractive b => Subtractive (a -> b)
but for a general type a there is no way to tell whether one function can be
subtracted from another, so a -> b will not have a WhenSubtractive instance.
I’m not particularly enamoured of the names WhenSubtractive and
WhenDivisive but also haven’t identified anything better.
3. Exponentiation
Notions of exponentiation in mathematics, and correspondingly in Haskell, fall
into two classes:
• In any ring, it is possible to raise elements to positive integer powers
(by induction), and for invertible elements it is possible to extend this
to all integer powers. In base Haskell, these concepts are represented by

5

the operators (^) and (^^) respectively. In NumHask, currently, both
operators are used but both for the latter concept.
• In the reals, and some closely related rings, there is a more analytic exponentiation: for example, we can raise a positive real to any real power. In
both base Haskell and NumHask this is represented by the operator (**).
3.1. Exponentiation with Integral exponents Being able to exponentiate elements of arbitrary rings (by positive integers) is rather important, and it is a
shame that NumHask currently doesn’t support this: currently it uses (^^) for
an Int-only version of (^); if this is useful enough to be worth having, then
other notation can surely be found.
I propose making (^) a method of the Multiplicative class, and (^^) a method
of the Divisive class.
The main reason is that there are many families of instances where a significantly
more efficient implementation can be given. These include:
• rings of floating-point numbers, where defining (^) and (^^) in terms of
(**) is preferable;
• idempotent rings, such as the Boolean ring, where (^) has very simple
behaviour;
• rings from modular arithmetic, where the Fermat-Euler theorem allows
more efficient exponentiation (and this is vital for cryptographic purposes).
The situation is parallel to the situation for Semigroup, where stimes is a method
with a default definition rather than a function for exactly the same reasons.
And, indeed, this change would improve the interaction with Monoid: when we
define the Semigroup instance on Product, we can define stimes to be (^); if
there are efficient powers, they will propagate through.
It might also be asked: if it’s useful to define (^) to be repeated multiplication
on Multiplicative instances, why shouldn’t we also provide repeated addition
for Additive instances? After all, the classes are formally similar in most other
regards. The answer is it’s unlikely to be necessary, because in most cases of
interest it can be done efficiently with functions that already exist: the n-fold
repeated addition of x can usually be defined to be x * fromInteger n.
4. Division with remainder
NumHask’s Integral class is a close copy of the one in base Haskell, and there
are some reasons to find it unsatisfactory.
The documentation is very cagey about what it’s for. First, they’re described as
“integral numbers”, a vague term which could mean “integers”, “elements of an
integral domain” (a ring where if xy=0 then x=0 or y=0), or some more abstruse
concept like “algebraic integers”. It goes on to say that “Integral instances are

6

customarily expected to define a Euclidean domain…” which encourages the
more general interpretations.
However, many well-established practical uses of Integral make a definite
and poorly-stated assumption that the type consists of actual integers. For
example, stimes in Data.Semigroup, or (^) and (^^) will simply not work
if used on anything that doesn’t obey extra laws. In particular the Gaussian
integers Complex Int are a Euclidean domain, and so one might be tempted to
put an Integral instance on them (using a newtype), but anyone attempting to
work out 3𝑖 using (^) will be sorely disappointed for reasons the type system
ought to know about.
The concept of division with remainder is a very general one, but having two
different conventions division with remainder (that is, div and mod rounding
towards minus infinity, and quot and rem rounding towards zero) is an idiosyncracy of the integers: for example, polynomials with coefficients in a field have
polynomial long division with remainder, but there is no choice of rounding convention. And, indeed, for the integers there is at least one other sensible rounding
convention, which is not supported by the base prelude, but well-known and
frequently useful: rounding to the nearest multiple (in fact, I personally feel this
may be more useful than quot and rem).
It is not fully clear how best to proceed, but I think two things need to be done
somehow (not counting the need to improve the documentation in base).
4.1. Classes for division with remainder The NumHask philosophy is to have
classes which can be thought of as atomic units of algebraic structure.
It’s safe to say that div, mod and divMod jointly form such a unit, and so should
be encapsulated in a class. It’s also safe to say that quot, rem and quotRem do.
One approach is to have two classes, which of course would look like duplicates
of one another.
A more daring approach would be to try to provide only one class with flexibility.
We might be able to do it by providing an extra “policy” type:
class Remaindered p a where
quotient :: p -> a -> a -> a
remainder :: p -> a -> a -> a
quotientRemainder :: p -> a -> a -> (a, a)
data ToMinusInfty = ToMinusInfty
data ToZero = ToZero
instance Remaindered ToMinusInfty Int where
quotient _ = P.div
remainder _ = P.mod

7

quotientRemainder _ = P.divMod
instance Remaindered ToZero Int where
quotient _ = P.quot
remainder _ = P.rem
quotientRemainder _ = P.quotRem
We could then hide the general framework in a way consistent with much existing
code by defining
quot = quotient ToZero
rem = remainder ToZero
quotRem = quotientRemainder ToZero
div = quotient ToMinusInfty
mod = remainder ToMinusInfty
divMod = quotientRemainder ToMinusInfty
4.2. The future of Integral Whatever we end up doing, we can then redo
Integral over the top. We should adjust the documentation to make it clear
that the class is solely for types which model the naturals or integers.
Given this newfound clarity of purpose, it would be possible to move other
functionality into Integral. Among all the huge array of structure reliably possessed by integer types, the most suitable thing might be code related to digits
(in binary, and in other bases).
5. Commutativity
One design feature of NumHask is to assume that addition is commutative, but
not to assume that multiplication is. This seems very sensible to me.
However, there are places in the codebase where assumptions of commutative
multiplication creep in. We should remove these assumptions where it’s not
going to cause anyone much extra work, and be explicit about them if not.
5.1. Property classes Following Section 1, the obvious thing to do is to introduce a new class Commutative certifying that multiplication is commutative.
Some natural constraints can be built by combining that with others:
type CommutativeSemiring a = (Commutative a, Semiring a)
type CommutativeRing a = (Commutative a, Ring a)
5.2. Commutativity and division At present, Divisive quietly assumes commutativity. The issue is that, for a noncommutative ring, there is left division
and right division, and they will not agree: solving the equations ax=b and xa=b

8

will yield different values of x. NumHask makes no effort to distinguish them,
so any noncommutative Divisive instance has unspecified behaviour.
It would be a bit of work to distinguish them, and provide both (using the
symbol \ for division on the other side, perhaps, though that will upset the
people who use it for set complementation) but it’s certainly possible.
The other solution, which is the path of least resistance in the short term, is to
make Divisive a subclass of Commutative. This rules out using Divisive for
noncommutative groups with multiplicative notation, and rules out working
with the quaternions, but can be done by changing one line of code and adding
some documentation.
5.3. Noncommutative Multiplicative actions There is a fairly similar problem
with MultiplicativeAction, but I think that the analysis of costs and benefits
works out differently.
This also currently quietly assumes commutativity. The standard axiom, not
currently mentioned in the documentation, is that
(m |* x) |* y = m |* (x * y).
One might expect the left-sided version (*|) to satisfy the analogous law
x *| (y *| m) = (x * y) *| m
but in fact since we have (*|) = flip (|*), we have the backwards version of
the law
x *| (y *| m) = (y * x) *| m
In any situation where it makes a difference, this behaviour is likely to surprise
and confuse.
As above, one could demand that a MultiplicativeAction requires its scalars
to be Commutative, but solving it more properly is not difficult: one can make
both (*|) and (|*) members of the class, with each defined in terms of the
other by default.
There is also a more nerdy solution, which is to put (*|) and (|*) in different classes LeftMultiplicativeAction and RightMultiplicativeAction. A
MultiplicativeAction would then be a subclass of both, required to satisfy
the compatibility law
x *| (m |* y) = (x *| m) |* y
While we’re about it, along the lines of Section 1, it might be worth having a
class (perhaps called Module) certifying the very common distributivity law for
a multiplicative action by a semiring:
m |* 0 = 0
m |* (x + y) = m |* x + m |* y

9

6. Positivity and ordered structures
The current interface for positive numbers is perfectly functional, but a little
clumsy.
There are several different variant behaviours one might want to deal with:
• Some types have no meaningful ability to restrict to positive numbers at
all (like complex numbers, the ring of integers modulo p, and so on);
• Some types are already all positive (like Natural), and so converting to
and from positive numbers should be the identity function;
• Some types have natural positive counterparts (like Word64 for Int64 and
so on), and builtin functionality should be used;
• Some types can use a homebrew version.
It would be more within the spirit of the library to have a typeclass representing
that a numeric type has a positive counterpart, and use a type family or a
functional dependency to keep track of what it is.
Also, all uses of positive actually mean nonnegative, but I’m not sure if that stands
to confuse anyone.
7. Heavier use of Newtypes
7.1. Systematic newtype deriving Both before and after implementing the proposals above, a very large number of instance definitions will have very similar
code. These can be shortened using DerivingVia. For example, many Additive
instances are defined because the base Prelude gives then Num instances, and
having a newtype FromBase and an instance
instance (P.FromInteger a, P.Num a) => Additive (FromBase a) where
zero = 0
(+) = (P.+)
then instance definitions like
deriving via FromBase Int instance Additive Int
are quicker and clearer than repeating ourselves.
7.2. Interacting with base Interacting with base is unavoidable, since users of
NumHask are going to wish to interact with code based on base. The methods
of the above section go the other way. We should have a ToBase newtype, in
order to provide Num instances.
A goodly amount of NumHask structure will be required even to produce a Num,
but that’s okay.

10

7.3. Other utility newtypes There are other sensible newtypes for transferring
structure. For example, to convert between Additive and Multiplicative. The
most sensible names for these are Exp and Log, perhaps!
instance Additive a => Multiplicative (Exp a) where
one = Exp zero
Exp x * Exp y = Exp (x + y)
instance Multiplicative a => Additive (Log a) where
zero = Log one
Log x + Log y = Log (x * y)
8. Other
8.1. Ratios NumHask currently redefines the Ratio type verbatim from the
Prelude. This doesn’t seem wise: reusing it improves interoperability.
The Prelude defines the functions numerator and denominator, which are useful.
Something the Prelude doesn’t define is a nice idiom for rational literals. One
can write 123 to get fromInteger 123 in any numeric type which supports it.
One can write 0.123 to get fromRational (123 :% 1000) in any numeric type
which supports it. But in order to get fromRational (12 :% 34) you have to
write out the fromRational longhand. This is upsetting: there must be many
programmers who need 1/3 or 1/6 far, far more frequently than they need
explicit floating-point literals. So it would be nice to have an operator which
imitates a literal rational. (But which operator?)
8.2. Complex numbers The NumHask implementation of Complex is not compatible with the one in base: the former is a lazy pair, whereas the latter is a
strict pair. The rationale for doing this is to make DerivingVia easier, but the
library does not use DerivingVia to derive any functionality from pairs.
It would probably be better to reuse the base Complex; one could still set things
up in such a way that EuclideanPair has a compatible implementation, allowing
DerivingVia to get functionality from it to Complex.
The ExpField instance for EuclideanPair would probably be more suitable for
Complex alone, and the semilattice instances for Complex are not algebraically
very meaningful.
8.3. Extra instances

There are a few missing instances dotted around:

• FromInteger for Ratio, Sum and Product
• Monus for Natural and Word

11

8.4. Squared norms Since an advantage of NumHask is that it makes complex
numbers usable even when the base ring has not much structure, it is useful to
have the squared norm:
normSquared :: Ring a => Complex a -> a
normSquared (Complex x y) = x*x + y*y
The squared norm is a usable replacement for the actual norm in many circumstances, and doesn’t demand the existence of square roots.
8.5. Subtract The base Prelude defines subtract to be flip (-), and so should
NumHask. This is useful for currying, because the parser has to be weird about
(-) given its dual use as a unary operator. For example, you can write things
like fmap (subtract 1) a to decrement every element of a data structure.
8.6. Trivial actions It would be useful for building up structures to have
TrivialAction, a type which has arithmetic actions by itself.
8.7. Inhomogeneous products It would be useful to have an inhomogeneous
product type, which has arithmetic operations pointwise. I thought about
suggesting that tuples be given this structure, and I can see arguments in favour
of doing this, but it’s probably better to have a new data structure for it:
data Prod x y = Prod !x !y
instance (Multiplicative x, Multiplicative y) => Multiplicative (Prod x y) where
Prod x1 y1 * Prod x2 y2 = Prod (x1 * x2) (y1 * y2)

12

